there's more than one way to cover what
the President of the United States did
and said publicly today it's an
extraordinary day and it's a difficult
day to find the right approach to what
happened in the Trump presidency today
our first approach to the Trump news
today even a few hours ago was to do
what we usually do which is deal with
the policy and political implications of
a series of comments the president made
today that no other president or
politician would ever say or do like
threatening to close our southern border
something that the Republican leader of
the Senate says would be catastrophic
economically something that would shut
down I mean shut down the American
automobile manufacturing industry and
yes something that would mean the United
States would run out of guacamole in
three weeks literally three weeks that's
the official calculation on what
Mexico's avocado supply means to the
United States but things got stranger
than usual with the president today he
said things for which there is no easy
explanation he said his father wasn't
born in the United States his father was
born in New York usually with a Trump
lie you can easily figure out what he's
trying to accomplish with the lie but
not today the president struggled to
pronounce a very simple word and he
repeatedly could not do it what does
that mean we have grown accustomed to
the vagaries and strangeness of Donald
Trump's public behavior but this was a
day where these strangest strangeness
dominated both the strangeness of the
policy positions and the strangeness of
the president's public behavior and
public words and in his final comments
public comments of the day he said this
tonight at a Republican fundraiser in
Washington if you had a normal president
I don't want to say that negatively I
think I'm very normal but if you had a
normal you know what I mean in other
words if you had a stiff as president
which most of them are I hate this at
how often do you hear a normal person
say I think I'm very normal have you
ever heard a President of the United
States feel compelled to publicly
announce I think I'm very normal does
that mean he knows he's not normal there
are a bunch of important questions
urgent questions about the president
today that political analysis cannot
answer political expertise cannot answer
some of these questions and that's why
along with our political analysts
tonight we're gonna be joined by a
psychiatrist in our leadoff discussion
of what the President did and said today
Donald Trump is a 72 year old man whose
father had Alzheimer's and died in New
York 93 years after he was born
in New York and today Donald Trump said
this about his father Fred Trump whose
picture the president keeps right behind
his desk in the Oval Office
my father is German right was German and
born in a very wonderful place in
Germany I so I have a great feeling for
Germany a wonderful place in Germany
what place his father was born in New
York just like Donald Trump Donald
Trump's grandfather was born in Germany
what does it mean when you confuse where
your father was born with where your
grandfather was born my father was born
in Boston my grandfather was born in
Ireland that I have never once confused
that but then I'm not 72 years old I
don't have Alzheimer's in my family
history and I'm not the President of the
United States trying to convince NATO
that I'm not just being mean when I
asked NATO countries to spend more money
on their military that's what Donald
Trump was actually talking about today
when he said that his father was born in
Germany he repeatedly said that the
United States spends much more on
defense than we actually do and that is
the kind of Trump falsehood that we
probably wouldn't even mention tonight
but in any other presidency that would
actually be the hot news of the day
president doesn't even know how much
money we spend on defense that would be
big news in any other presidency
watching the president today you had a
right to wonder whether the president
simply likes to exaggerate how much we
spend on defense or actually cannot
learn the real number of what we spend
on defense you had a right to wonder
today if there's something wrong with
the workings of the president's mind
especially if you watched him repeatedly
struggle to say the word origin
what kept coming out was something that
sounded like oranges and I hope that
this investigation now which is finished
it's totally finished no collusion no
obstruction
I hope they now go and take a look at
the oranges or the oranges of the
investigation of the beginnings of that
investigation you look at the origin of
the investigation where it started how
it started who started it whether its
McCabe or Comey or a lot of them where
does it go how high up in the White
House did it go
you will all get Pulitzer Prizes okay
you're gonna all get Pulitzer Prizes you
should have looked at it a long time ago
and that's the only thing that's
disappointing to me about the Mullen
report the Muller report
I wish covered the oranges how it
started the beginnings of the
investigation how it started
he said oranges twice then he
successfully said the word origin which
apparently gave him the confidence to
try to say it one more time
and when he tried to say it one more
time he said oranges again I don't know
what that is I have my own struggle with
words you see that here but it's simply
a struggle to suppress my native Boston
accent in favor of speaking American
it's not that I try to say a very simple
word and I can only get out the first
two letters before I change that simple
word into a completely different word
repeatedly what is that what was
happening to the President of the United
States today the president recently
decided to order his Justice Department
to switch sides in the legal case from
defending the Affordable Care Act in
court as the Justice Department is
supposed to do with all federal laws two
opposing the Affordable Care Act in
court which is an unprecedented position
taken by the Trump Justice Department
the President did that against the
wishes of the top Republican in Congress
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell
it is a politically disastrous position
for the president to take as Mitch
McConnell knows then as every Republican
in Congress knows but the president did
it anyway in any other politician if any
other politician did that we would be
questioning his or her neurological
health tonight that's how politically
crazy that is but we've grown accustomed
to that with Donald Trump the president
has been pretending that he has a health
care plan ready to pass and be signed
into law as soon as the Supreme Court
strikes down Obamacare but no one
believes that and today Mitch McConnell
said he finally got the president to
stop saying that
not any longer we had a good
conversation yesterday afternoon and I
pointed out to him the Senate
Republicans a view on dealing with
comprehensive health care reform with a
Democratic House of Representatives so I
made it clear to him and we were not
going to be doing that in the Senate so
we don't have a misunderstanding about
that will not be doing comprehensive in
the Senate and minutes after Mitch
McConnell said that Donald Trump said
this no I wanted to delay it myself I
want to put it after the election
because we don't have the house so even
though the healthcare is good really
good it's much better than when the plan
comes out which will be showing you at
the appropriate time it's much better
than Obama care so when the plan comes
out you'll see it it's much better than
Obama care it doesn't exist but it's
much better than Obama care not a word
of the Trump health care plan exists
anywhere not on a note paired pad
nowhere but it's much better than Obama
care what do you call it there is a
political discussion to be had about
this and there is a psychiatric
discussion to be had about this and that
is why we are leading off our discussion
tonight with dr. prudence gorgish on the
psychiatrist and psychoanalyst and past
president of the American psychoanalytic
Association also with us Ron Klain a
former senior aide to President Obama
and former chief counsel to the Senate
Judiciary Committee he knows the
workings of the White House and the
Senate and knows the kind of dynamics
that go on between Mitch McConnell and
President Trump in a situation like this
and Adam Jensen is with us he's the
former deputy chief of staff to former
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid he
knows the workings of Mitch McConnell's
mind on these matters very well he's
joined us before on this subject but
doctor I want to start with you this is
one of those days as every day is but
this is this is the day where it just
became overwhelming we're in watching
the president it became imperative that
we once again check in on a psychiatric
view
of what it is we're watching when we're
watching Donald Trump in these
situations well I feel like you asked me
here kind of on a house call tonight it
was a very strange day even for Donald
Trump I think what he'll say tomorrow
I predict is that he meant to say his
grandfather was born in Germany he was
clearly struggling to find to kind of
locate his thoughts in his memories and
he'll he'll get a hill he'll just the
segue out of that by saying he meant his
grandfather the the word finding problem
I didn't hear him saying oranges to me
he had the first two syllables of the
word and he couldn't remember the end of
it that's what it sounded like to me and
then he substituted beginning and the
start of and then he wanted to go back
to it so yeah is there I can't do a
neurologic exam just watching the the
tape today if he were a normal leader to
use his phrase he would seek an
evaluation if he were seeing you of a
big company and he found himself
forgetting words or making mistakes like
grandfather and father conflating them
he'd see canor logic neuropsychiatric
evaluation and willingly eagerly to see
if he was having cognitive difficulties
but I don't think he'll do that and
doctor when you see him tonight standing
up there in front of an audience after a
day like today or any day saying things
like I'm perfectly normal I think I'm
perfectly normal in your experience and
I'm not saying I don't mean Donald Trump
particularly since you have no
experience with him but in your clinical
experience in dealing with people and
the way they talk about themselves does
that kind of comment about oneself tell
us anything about that person well we
have a concept called the unprovoked
denial so you know if you say I am NOT a
liar and nobody asked you if you were
you wonder why the person is bringing it
up so it's it comes under the heading of
unprovoked denial and it's so you know
it's kind of like okay
well I didn't ask if you were normal so
why is it on your mind
he clearly sounded very very stressed
and anxious today and if anybody with
it's going to have more with a slightest
bit of difficulty cognitively just in
general if they're under a lot of stress
it's going to show itself if there's a
tiny bit a mild cognitive difficulty
you're going to see a lot more of it in
a stressful situation the unprovoked
denial I've just written it down and Ron
Klain I think that's going to be a
graphic that you will be seeing
describing other segments we will be
doing on this show in the future the the
unprovoked denial your reaction to what
Ron Klain to what you saw the president
doing today well look I'm not a doctor I
can't diagnose it but what I can say is
as someone who's watched this for two
years and seen a lot of craziness come
out of the Oval Office today was like
the Beethoven's 5th of craziness from
Donald Trump it was just an endless
array of ridiculous things the things
you showed obviously at the top of the
show Lawrence but also the president
announced that we could solve the border
problem if we can just get rid of judges
he announced that he announced that
basically he set up a task force to deal
with the problem that his task force
that's gonna shut the border is gonna
create he announced he has a health care
plan except he doesn't except Lee would
have won except that Mitch McConnell
asked him not to
except that he's gonna have one after
the election I mean oh it was just it
really was you know in a in a
administration where every single day
looks like this this is really one of
the most notable days of exceptional
nuttiness coming from the White House
Adam Jensen I think you and I and and
Ron certainly we first look at all these
things politically we look at them in
terms of a governing analysis and
political analysis but today was a day
where I had to surrender the political
analysis that's why I wanted the doctor
on but but to stick with the political
analysis the president parts this turns
the Justice Department around and says I
want you to attack the Affordable Care
Act in court Mitch McConnell thinks
that's a disastrous thing for the
president to do and that is something
that if any
that alone if any other White House was
doing that everyone in Washington would
be using the word crazy about that White
House yeah that's right you you won't
hear me say this very often but I agree
with Mitch McConnell it's an insane
thing to just you know I mean the
president was having a decent run of
positive news and then by ordering the
Justice Department to do this he put the
news squarely and Democrats turf I mean
health care is the single most
motivating issue to Democrats it's an
issue we used very strongly to take back
the house in 2018 and it's it's just
inexplicable for the president to put it
back in enemy territory like this it
just doesn't make any sense at all and
doctor I wanted to ask you one more
thing about the President and this is
something that's Republican senator
Lamar Alexander
said about the president thinking and he
was intending to compliment him he said
even people who don't like him when they
are with him are impressed with how
easily he works a room I think he likes
people he lives in the moment he's not
thinking of the next day or even the
next hour or the next person he's that
kind of personality doctor what kind of
personality is that I'm not sure I
totally agree with that I'd throw the
situation back to the political side
because again as I said earlier he seems
extremely stressed none of us functions
whatever a functional level is whatever
our best functional level is none of us
fucked is is there all the time so if
you see somebody slipping from their
usual level that indicates they're under
a lot of stress and tension and I wonder
if there's some political tension going
on that makes him look particularly
vulnerable and scattered today does he
live in the moment
I think he's constantly strategizing to
figure out how to to make himself look
good and so I don't know if I'd agree
with Senator Alexander
all right we're gonna have to leave it
there we have a commercial break coming
up doctor prudence Gorga Shawn Ron Klain
Adam Jensen thank you all for starting
off our discussion tonight thanks for
checking out our youtube channel
subscribe by clicking on the button
below for more from the last word and
the rest of MSNBC